Bath Iron Works Hull #140: Helene
Background Information:
Diesel-powered yacht built for Charles Sorensen, Vice President of Engineering – Ford Motor Co.; contract signed with BIW in October 1929, just as the stock market was collapsing.  The major contract milestones are listed below:
Keel laid August 1, 1930
Launched April 18, 1931
Delivered May 15, 1931
A 1930 advertisement featuring “The First and the Best” private yachts from Bath Iron Works lists Helene as being under construction.  Attachment 1, below, contains a photo copy of this advertisement for reference
Hull #140 Principal Dimensions (General Particulars)
146’ 4” length overall
24’ 10” beam
14’ 3” depth
8’ 6” draft
Displacement 345 tons light ship
Displacement 371 tons full load
Twin screws; two 800 horsepower diesel engines
A copy of the brief listing for BIW Hull #140 Helene that is included in the BIW List of Ships is provided as Attachment 2, below.
Bath Iron Works Documentation:
There are no extant, in-house BIW company business records or other primary sources related to the construction contract for BIW Hull #140 Helene.  Detail construction drawings, contract documents, purchasing records and correspondence records were undoubtedly created during 1929/1931 to support the construction of Hull #140; however, during the intervening 88 years, virtually all of this documentation has either been discarded or donated to the Maine Maritime Museum (see below).  The only documents remaining in our files are limited to several launch day pictures and photographs of finished interior spaces.  Another clear indication that BIW no longer maintains any business or technical files from commercial or yacht construction projects prior to 1950 is that the last remaining in-house micro-film/micro-fiche copies of old ship design and construction drawings were eliminated a decade ago, when the reader/projector equipment failed and could not be repaired.
Copies of the photographs of Hull 140 on launch day and selected finished interior spaces are included in Attachment 3 below, for reference.
Maine Maritime Museum Documentation:
One very likely source for information related to Hull #140 Helene is the Maine Maritime Museum, which is located in Bath, Maine at 243 Washington Street; (207) 443-1316 (www.mainemaritimemuseum.org).  The museum was founded in 1962 and receives significant support from the local business community, including BIW.  Over the last 50 years, BIW has donated large quantities of ship construction contract information, drawings, models, correspondence and photographs to the museum that pertain to both BIW Ltd (1884-1925) and to BIW Corporation (established in 1927).  A substantial amount of this donated material has been cataloged and archived under the general heading of the Bath Iron Works Collection (referred to as “BIWC”).  The BIWC was used as one of the primary information sources for “Bath Iron Works – The First 100 Years”; a corporate history commissioned by BIW President William Haggett to commemorate BIW’s centennial in 1984.  The book (671 pages) was written by Linwood Snow, a former Director of the Maine Maritime Museum; printed 1987, it was given away to employees, vendors and local businesses and is out of print/no longer available.  The text of the “First 100 Years” (Chapter 8, page 232) serves to confirm that the Bath Iron Works Collection in the Maine Maritime Museum’s archive contains contract documents related to Hull #140 by reporting that the original contract price was $225,000 and recounting the details of the disputed added cost claims of almost $58,000 (~25% over base price) for change order work added by the owner, Mr. Sorensen.  References are embedded in the text to four Chapter 8 end notes [27, 28, 29 and 30], all of which cite the BIWC as source for this contract information.
Photo copies of page 232 taken from the “First 100 Years”, as well as the full text of the four cited end notes on page 633, are provided in Attachment 4 below.
Although the few text references to Hull #140 or/and Charles Sorensen that are included in the “First 100 Years” do not specifically mention design drawings or other technical documentation, it is entirely reasonable to assume that some of the Hull #140 documents BIW donated to the museum included ship design drawings from Henry J. Gielow, Inc.  Furthermore, the lengthy biography of Henry J. Gielow, written by Stephen Rappaport and published in The Encyclopedia of Yacht Designers (copyright 2006 by L. Knight and D. MacNaughton; W.W. Norton & Co) states that, in addition to the H. J. Gielow Collection at the Mystic Seaport Museum, some of his drawings are held in the archives of the Maine Maritime Museum in Bath, Maine.  It is even possible that copies of the outboard profile and deck arrangement plans that you obtained from BIW in the 1950s are in the museum archives.  Unfortunately, a number of the BIW-donated items have not, as yet, been properly inventoried or even indexed; therefore, they are not included on the formal accessions list of the museum’s archival holdings, making it virtually impossible to access these records for research purposes.  It will be necessary to work directly with the museum to determine the full extent of the Hull #140 documentation that has been cataloged and recorded in the accession files of their archives.  The Maine Maritime Museum has a relatively small staff, consisting mostly of volunteers.  While you may be able to establish whether or not ship drawings exist for Hull #140 over the telephone, in most cases, the museum expects researchers to conduct their own document searches in person.
One positive note is that the museum’s senior curator, Nathan Lipfert, told me in August 2016 that the museum does have a wooden half model of Hull #140 Helene that was donated by BIW; it is included on the formal accessions list.  The existence of a BIW-donated half model is another strong indication that the Helene design documentation package provided to the museum by Bath Iron Works included drawings and technical specifications prepared by Henry J. Gielow, Inc.  This half model is not on display in the museum; it is stored in an off-site location.  In order to examine the model or take photographs of it, it will be necessary to make an appointment several days in advance so that the model can be retrieved from storage.
As is the case with most museum-based libraries, there are archive access fees, photocopying charges and a charge of $25.00/picture for a printed or scanned copy of a photograph (photo scanning is done on-site by the museum staff).  Copies of large format ship drawings are made by a local photographic studio; costs vary based on overall size and number of sheets in the drawing.  The museum will provide a price quote at the time the order is placed; payment must be received before the order will be processed.  These charges apply to everyone, including Bath Iron Works; this holds true even if the shipyard wants copies of photographs or technical documents that we donated to the museum in the first place.  To give you some idea of the cost of drawing reproduction, I recently purchased a copy of the lines drawing for Ranger J-5 (successful America’s Cup defender in 1937; built by BIW; designed by Starling Burgess and Olin Stephens; owned by Harold Vanderbilt).  The original 3-sheet drawing was executed in ink on linen cloth; each sheet of this large format document is 36” wide.  The cost of a photographic copy printed on plain bond paper was $125.00.
Henry J. Gielow, Inc Documentation:
Helene was designed by the Henry J. Gielow Company; Naval Architects, New York, NY.  Acknowledged as the designer of some of the most opulent and successful yachts ever built, Gielow produced a body of work whose hallmarks were, according to contemporary accounts, “economy of space, beauty, seaworthiness and the artistic arrangement of details.”  He was an early advocate of using gasoline and diesel engines (as opposed to steam) in large yachts.  The design for Helene was created during 1928/1929.  The same design was purchased by two other H. J. Gielow clients (identical hull dimensions, displacement and systems arrangements) and used by BIW to construct two private yachts during the same time period that Helene was built.  BIW Hull #145 Felicia was originally ordered by George M. Pynchon of Glen Cove, NY, but ownership was transferred to Senator Jesse Metcalf of Rhode Island before the delivery on September 14, 1931; and BIW Hull #146 Halonia, built for Charles A. Thorne, was delivered on June 15, 1931.  One significant difference among these three yachts was that Felicia incorporated a diesel-electric plant for propulsion – the first yacht with this innovative propulsion system to be built in the United States.  Of course, the arrangements and decor of the interior living spaces were customized to suit each owner’s requirements.  In terms of your search for ship drawings and other technical documentation related to Helene, the fact that BIW constructed three private yachts using the same design that were all delivered in the same year (1931), should substantially increase your chances of finding relevant historical records.  Even if some of the information that your research uncovers is attributed to Felicia or Halonia, instead of Helene, it will still provide you with technically accurate background/supporting data, especially if the items include detail hull/structural design drawings.
As noted above, the BIW company records do not contain any drawings or related technical documentation for Hull #140 Helene or any other of the numerous private yachts built by BIW in the first half of the 20th century.  However the G. W. Blunt White Library at the Mystic Seaport Museum, in Mystic, CT (www.mysticseaport.org) does have two collections of business manuscripts and drawings related to Henry J. Gielow, Inc.:
H. J. Gielow, Inc. Manuscript Collection 345 (accession number MC 2008.14) contains 713 items, including vessel descriptions and drawings of yachts designed by H. J. Gielow, Inc., business correspondence, publications, brochures and catalogs.  A partial listing of the contents of Collection 345 mentions several yachts by name (Hi Esmaro and Caroline) but Helene is not included; however, the index also refers to “drawing collections for twin screw diesel-powered yachts” [no vessel names or other identification provided].
A printed copy of the on-line listing of the contents of Manuscript Collection 345 is provided in Attachment 5 below, for your reference.  The documents themselves are not accessible on-line; viewing them requires a visit to the G. W. Blunt White Library at the Mystic Seaport.
H. J. Gielow, Inc. Ships Plans Collection 117: These plans are from the design firm and ship brokerage of Henry J. Gielow, Inc.; the include yachts and commercial craft in both power and sail, and range in date from 1896 to 1950.  As of this date, a content listing for Ships Plans Collection 117 has not been posted on-line and, as was the case for the manuscript collection, accessing the documents for research purposes requires a visit to the G. W. Blunt White Library.
Another potential source for documentation about Henry J. Gielow yacht designs is the Francis Russell Hart Nautical Museum at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  The Hart Nautical Collections are among the oldest marine technology collections in the United States.  Established in 1922 as the Francis Russell Hart Nautical Museum, it merged with the MIT Museum in 1982.  Since its inception almost 100 years ago, the collection has developed into one of the most important archives of nautical technology in America, consisting of ship and yacht plans, full-, half-, and towing-tank models, marine art, books, photographs, and shipbuilding records.  Since museum holdings include materials relating to the technical history of New England ship and small craft design and construction from the mid-19th through the mid-20th centuries, there is a reasonable chance that work products from one of the nation’s foremost naval architects are included in the Hart Nautical Museum archives.
The Hart Nautical Gallery is located on the MIT Campus, in Building 5, at 55 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139 (www.mitmuseum.mit.edu)
Vessel Operational History
BIW Hull #140 was delivered on May 15, 1931, and departed from Bath Maine on the same day; BIW records do not show the ship’s destination.  Since the owner was an executive with the Ford Motor Co., it possible that it sailed through the St. Lawrence Seaway, Lake Ontario, Lake Erie and the Detroit River to reach Detroit, Michigan.  In view of the fact that the ship was designed for long distance open-ocean cruising, it is more likely that it was berthed at one of the exclusive east coast yacht clubs that catered to the wealthy yachtsmen of the era.  Mr. Sorensen had the use of Helene until 1939, when the yacht was purchased by the US Army for service in World War II
1939 – 1946: During World War II, the US Government purchased a large number of private yachts for patrol duties and troop transport duties.  According to a story published in The Baltimore Sun on November 1, 1939, the ocean-going yacht Helene was acquired by the War Department from Charles E. Sorenson [sic] for survey work in Alaskan waters.  The vessel was renamed USS Cavanaugh, after COL Cavanaugh, a former commander of the Army Corps of Engineers-Seattle District.  An initial set of military service renovations were completed in an east coast shipyard before the ship departed for the west coast via the Panama Canal, entering the east coast locks at Colon on November 11th and clearing the west coast locks at Balboa on November 14th bound for Seattle.  Following additional structural and arrangement modifications in Seattle, the Cavanaugh spent the duration of World War II conducting coastal patrols and oceanographic surveys and serving as a troop transport along the Aleutian Peninsula.
Copies of the 1939 photograph from The Baltimore Sun, the Panama Canal transit record and additional photographs of USS Cavanaugh, Army Corps of Engineers survey vessel, in dry dock and at sea, circa 1941-1942, are contained in Attachment 6 below.
1946 – 1989:  After the Cavanaugh's service to the military was over, the yacht was offered back to the original owner, Charles E. Sorensen, but was apparently refused due to her deteriorated condition after years of military service in the arctic.  The yacht was sold at auction (identity of the new owner unknown) and subsequently had two other owners, as outlined below:
The third owner retained the name Cavanaugh (USS was dropped because it was no longer a commissioned United States Ship)
The fourth owner re-named her Caronia.  The vessel spent most of her years cruising in the coastal waters off southern California; homeport is unknown, but given the ship’s size and cruising range, it was likely to have been berthed in Santa Barbara
The vessel was eventually sold a fifth time to Dragon Yachts, a European yacht charter company, and renamed Welsh Princess.  The ship was re-powered with Cummins diesel engines and in an effort to modernize her appearance was fitted with a flared bow extension and other cosmetic enhancements.  On July 7, 1989, a fire broke out in the engine room while the ship was underway to Cardiff, Wales.  The crew could not control the blaze and the ship sank in the English Channel that same day.
Attachment 1 (1 pg): 1930 advertisement featuring “The First and the Best” private yachts from Bath Iron Works; lists Helene as being under construction



Attachment 2 (1 pg): Listing for BIW Hull #140 Helene included in the BIW List of Ships

HULL 140  Helene	Diesel Yacht for Charles E. Sorensen, Vice President of Ford Motor Co.

General Particulars:
	146'-4" long, 24'-10" beam, 14'-3" depth, 8'-6" draft,
	Displacement 345 tons light ship, 371 tons full load,
	2 diesel engines, 800 horsepower; twin shafts and propellers
Key Milestone Dates:
	Keel laid August 1, 1930
	Launched April 18, 1931
	Delivered May 15, 1931

Comments:
Designed by Henry J. Gielow, Inc
Transferred to the United States Army Corps of Engineers in 1939 and renamed 
USS Cavanaugh; homeported in Seattle and served as a survey ship and troop transport for the Army Corps of Engineers in Alaskan/arctic waters in World War II.
Sold at auction (circa 1946) after the war ended; new owner retained the name Cavanaugh (USS dropped, no longer a commissioned United States Ship)
Sold (new owner unknown; no sale date available); renamed Caronia
Sold to Dragon Yachts (no date available); renamed Welsh Princess and added to a yacht charter fleet; vessel sank on July 7, 1989 off the coast of Cardiff, Wales, as the result of an engine room fire.



Attachment 3 (5 pgs): Photographs of Hull 140 on launch day and selected finished interior spaces

Hull 140 Helene: Launch Day, April 18, 1931


Note: Black funnel/uptake with letter “K” belongs to a tugboat positioned behind BIW Hull 140, on the starboard quarter, that was used to control the vessel after it was launched

Hull 140 Helene: Launch Day, April 18, 1931





Hull 140 Helene: Main Salon and Library





Hull 140 Helene: Owner’s Stateroom






Hull 140 Helene: Chart Room off the Bridge



Attachment 4 (2 pgs): Photo copies of pages 232 and 633 taken from the “First 100 Years”; text on page 232 confirms that Bath Iron Works Collection (BIWC) in Maine Maritime Museum’s archive contains Hull #140 contract documents; page 633 contains text of four end notes [27, 28, 29 and 30] cited on page 232




page 633 contains text of four end notes [27, 28, 29 and 30] cited on page 232


Attachment 5 (8 pgs): Printed copy of on-line listing of contents of H. J. Gielow, Inc. Manuscript Collection 345 (accession number MC 2008.14) in the G. W. Blunt White Library at the Mystic Seaport.  The documents themselves are not accessible on-line; viewing them requires a visit to the museum.




































Attachment 6 (7 pgs): 1939 photo of Helene from The Baltimore Sun, the Panama Canal transit record and photographs of USS Cavanaugh, Army Corps of Engineers survey vessel, in dry dock and at sea, circa 1941-1942

1939 photo of Helene from The Baltimore Sun





Hull 140 Helene: Panama Canal transit record



USS Cavanaugh, Army Corps of Engineers survey vessel, in dry dock, circa November 1941






USS Cavanaugh, Army Corps of Engineers survey vessel, in dry dock, circa November 1941




USS Cavanaugh, Army Corps of Engineers survey vessel, at sea off Alaska, circa 1942/3




USS Cavanaugh, Army Corps of Engineers survey vessel, at sea off Alaska, circa 1942/3





USS Cavanaugh, Army Corps of Engineers survey vessel, at sea off Alaska, circa 1942/3


